---
title: "The Three Ways of DevOps"
layout: post
author: bill_wheatley
date:   2025-02-03 00:00:00 -0500
tags: 
  - MBPM
  - DevOps 
  - Feeback Loops
  - Culture
image:
  thumbnail: /assets/3-ways-thumb.png
  path: /assets/3-ways-splash-wide.png
---

# 3 Ways of DevOps

## Intro

DevOps is a term that means different things to different people. For me, it's less about semantics and more about the concepts.  Implementing these 3 fundamental concepts is foundational to making an IT organization efficient.

## The Three Ways

### The First Way: Flow or Systems Thinking

The way I think about this is the difference between seeing the forest from the trees. It's one thing to optimize a small portion of an enterprise, but when the whole gets overlooked, you might be missing the big parts of optimization in favor of a minor gain.  

To get to a meaningful holistic understanding, you need to see the flow of the work.  This encompasses both manual and automated work. A few practices that work well to get you started are Value Stream Mapping and [Metrics-Based Process Mapping (MBPM)](/2024/08/08/mbpm.html).

Having the big picture allows you to prioritize what needs to be improved based on holistic data.  

### The Second Way: Optimizing Feedback Loops

This goal here is to get information back on what you are doing, what you're building and is working well or not. Ideally you want this information sooner rather than later so working on speed and frequency of feedback is also important here.

A prerequisite to understanding this concept is that perfection in IT is impossible to obtain or even near perfection is very hard to obtain. If you understand that and you seek quality then you have to take an iterative approach that uses feedback cycles to incrementally get better.  The faster you can test your approach and get this information, the faster you will get better.

If you are coming from a waterfall methodology, this is often difficult and counterintuitive. Waterfall methodology holds that if something didn’t turn out well in the design once it was delivered, it was because of poor planning or poor design, and you need to plan or design better next time.  This methodology stands in stark contrast and holds that you can’t create good solutions without feedback, so if feedback is the ultimate barometer of success, you need to design a process that gets feedback quickly and course correct sooner rather than later.

#### Metrics

One of the more effective feedback loops can be quantifiable metric. The highest order of feedback is from your customer or end users.  

It is worth pointing out that even subjective metrics can be quantifiable if you put the rating on a scale, think product reviews for instance. You can also pose subjective questions to rate things relative to each other or in rank order.

TODO something about business metrics and discovering problems

#### Proxy Metrics

Somethings are hidden from the end user, for instance how long is your testing cycle for a release? This does the effect the customer but its probably not something they can put their fingers on as to a specific way things can be measured in the customers eyes. For these back office type metrics or proxy metrics it can be important to measure so long as it serves the end customer.  Ideally you do need to make sure the end user is really benefiting from optimizing processes using proxy metrics and not just justify it based on a theory of how it could benefit the end user.

One popular method of measure proxy metrics that are often shown to benefit end users is the DORA metrics:

* **Deployment Frequency**: This measures how often a successfully releases to production is done. A higher frequency represents a more mature team or organization.  If you are measuring in releases per day, that is highly mature.  If you are releasing quarterly or annually you may need some improvement.
* **Lead Time for Changes**: This measures the time it takes for an Agile story to move from start to live in production. Lower time is considered more mature.
* **Change Failure Rate**: This measures the percentage of code changes that result in failures or incidents in production. Lower failure rates are considered more mature when the other metrics are also optimized. 
* **Mean Time To Recovery (MTTR)**: This measures the time it takes to restore a service after a failure. A lower MTTR indicates a more resilient system and a more effective problem response process.

### The Third Way: Culture of Continual Learning and Experimentation  

Once you get the first two ways established in your DevOps journey, you are now ready to move on to perhaps the most powerful of the ways.  

If you remember me saying that perfection in IT is impossible to obtain or even near perfection is very hard to obtain, it is because really good answers are not obvious from the start, and the ever-shifting IT landscape of technologies is rapidly changing. Between these two factors, you have to allow space for learning and growth.

Not all learning is a training course or reading an O'Reilly book (this is a technical publisher, not the political ones). While I encourage this, it's not a complete solution to learning. Some things are unique to your environment, unique to your customer base.

With non-obvious solutions and technical tools that you may not be familiar with, the likelihood of any change becoming an inferior solution exists. Initially, it’s not evident which solutions will be effective and which ones won’t, necessitating experimentation to determine the answer.

Experimentation can be a tough thing to allow in some IT cultures.  The thinking typically is that a failure is a waste of money.  Also, sometimes failures are also assumed to be because of low knowledge or low competency employees. If these ideas take hold, that causes a culture of caution and hesitancy to take place, as no one wants to do the wrong thing. This generally leads to dated technology, slow changes, and not being able to keep up with the market overtime.  IT departments that obsess over getting it right the first time more often than not slowly fail as a whole.

Experimentation must be encouraged, failures need to be seen as a learning experience, now you know it doesn’t work well. Successful experimentation needs to be celebrated.  

## Video

TODO